README.md, before:

<div align="center">

# ⏰ ScheduleZero

### Lightweight Distributed Task Scheduling for Python

[![Python 3.12+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

[Features](#-features) •
[Quick Start](#-quick-start) •
[Architecture](#-architecture) •
[Documentation](#-documentation) •
[API](#-api-reference)

</div>

---

## 🎯 Overview

**ScheduleZero** is a resource-conscious, distributed task scheduling system built entirely in Python. Perfect for scenarios where heavyweight solutions like Celery are overkill—especially on memory-constrained systems like small VMs or edge devices.

**Why ScheduleZero?**
- 🪶 **Lightweight**: No message broker required (RabbitMQ/Redis)
- 🚀 **Fast**: Built on modern async Python (asyncio, Tornado)
- 🔄 **Distributed**: Scale horizontally with worker handlers
- 💾 **Persistent**: SQLite-based job storage
- 🎨 **Beautiful UI**: Modern web interface for monitoring
- 🔌 **Brokerless**: Direct RPC communication via zerorpc
- 🛡️ **Reliable**: Built-in retry logic with exponential backoff

---

## ✨ Features

### Core Capabilities
- **🕐 Flexible Scheduling**: Date, interval, and cron triggers via APScheduler 4.x
- **📡 Remote Execution**: Distribute jobs across multiple handler processes
- **🔄 Auto-Discovery**: Handlers self-register with the central server
- **💪 Resilient**: Automatic retries with exponential backoff + jitter
- **📊 REST API**: Full HTTP API for programmatic control
- **🎛️ Web Dashboard**: Real-time monitoring and job management
- **💾 Persistent Storage**: Jobs survive restarts via SQLite
- **🔐 Thread-Safe**: Concurrent job execution with proper locking

### Advanced Features
- **Dynamic Handler Registration**: Add/remove workers on-the-fly
- **Method-Level Routing**: Route jobs to specific handler methods
- **Status Tracking**: Monitor handler availability and job execution
- **Configuration Management**: YAML-based instance configuration
- **Graceful Shutdown**: Clean termination of all components
- **Exponential Backoff**: Smart retry logic for failed jobs

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Using Poetry (recommended)
poetry install

# Or using pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Configuration

Create `config.yaml` in your project root:

```yaml
instance_name: "My ScheduleZero Instance"
description: "Production task scheduler"
admin_contact: "admin@example.com"
version: "1.0.0"
```

### Running

**Terminal 1 - Start the Server:**
```bash
poetry run schedule-zero-server
# Server starts on http://127.0.0.1:8888
```

**Terminal 2 - Start a Handler:**
```bash
poetry run schedule-zero-handler
# Handler auto-registers and starts listening
```

**Terminal 3 - Test the System:**
```bash
poetry run python test_schedule.py
# Runs end-to-end tests
```

### Access the Dashboard

Open your browser to **http://localhost:8888**

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Component Overview

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│               ScheduleZero Central Server               │
│                                                           │
│  ┌──────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐  │
│  │   Tornado    │  │  APScheduler │  │   zerorpc    │  │
│  │  Web Server  │──│   4.x Async  │──│Registration  │  │
│  │   :8888      │  │   Scheduler  │  │Server :4242  │  │
│  └──────────────┘  └──────────────┘  └──────────────┘  │
│         │                  │                  │          │
│         │                  │                  │          │
│    ┌────▼─────┐      ┌────▼──────┐     ┌────▼──────┐  │
│    │   HTTP   │      │  SQLite   │     │ Handler   │  │
│    │   API    │      │  JobStore │     │ Registry  │  │
│    └──────────┘      └───────────┘     └───────────┘  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                          │
                          │  zerorpc (tcp)
                          │
        ┌─────────────────┴─────────────────┐
        │                                   │
        ▼                                   ▼
┌───────────────┐                   ┌───────────────┐
│   Handler 1   │                   │   Handler 2   │
│   :4243       │                   │   :4244       │
│               │                   │               │
│  • do_work()  │                   │  • process()  │
│  • backup()   │                   │  • analyze()  │
└───────────────┘                   └───────────────┘
```

### Technology Stack

| Component | Technology | Purpose |
|-----------|-----------|---------|
| **Web Framework** | Tornado 6.5+ | Async web server & HTTP API |
| **Scheduler** | APScheduler 4.x | Job scheduling & execution |
| **RPC Layer** | zerorpc | Lightweight, brokerless communication |
| **Persistence** | SQLite + SQLAlchemy | Job storage & retrieval |
| **Transport** | ZeroMQ | High-performance messaging |
| **Serialization** | MessagePack | Efficient data encoding |
| **Configuration** | PyYAML | Human-readable config files |

### Why These Choices?

#### 🌪️ **Tornado**
- Native `asyncio` support for APScheduler 4.x integration
- Efficient async I/O for handling many connections
- Built-in web server—no external dependencies

#### 📅 **APScheduler 4.x**
- Modern async-first design
- Flexible trigger types (date, interval, cron)
- Persistent job storage with datastore abstraction

#### 🔌 **zerorpc**
- No message broker required (unlike Celery)
- Minimal memory footprint
- Built-in heartbeat and timeout handling
- Automatic serialization with MessagePack

#### 💾 **SQLite**
- Zero configuration database
- Low memory usage (< 1MB typical)
- Perfect for embedded/edge deployments
- ACID transactions for reliability

---

## 📖 Documentation

### File Structure (After Refactoring)

```
src/schedule_zero/
├── app_configuration.py          # App config & environment vars
├── handler_registry.py            # Handler registration & clients
├── job_executor.py                # Job execution with retries
├── zerorpc_registration_server.py # RPC server for registration
├── tornado_app_server.py          # Main server orchestration
├── server.py                      # CLI entry point
├── api/
│   ├── tornado_base_handlers.py   # Base Tornado handlers
│   ├── handler_list_api.py        # Handler endpoints
│   ├── job_scheduling_api.py      # Job scheduling endpoints
│   └── config_api.py              # Configuration endpoint
└── handlers/
    ├── base.py                    # Abstract handler base class
    └── example.py                 # Example handler implementation
```

**Documentation Files:**
- [`REFACTORING_SUMMARY.md`](REFACTORING_SUMMARY.md) - Detailed refactoring notes
- [`TESTING_STATUS.md`](TESTING_STATUS.md) - Current testing status & known issues

---

## 🔌 API Reference

### Handler Management

#### List Handlers
```http
GET /api/handlers
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "handlers": [
    {
      "id": "handler_12345",
      "address": "tcp://127.0.0.1:4243",
      "methods": ["do_work", "backup", "process"],
      "status": "Connected"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Job Scheduling

#### Schedule a Job
```http
POST /api/schedule
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "handler_id": "handler_12345",
  "method_name": "do_work",
  "job_params": {
    "input_file": "/data/file.txt",
    "output_dir": "/results/"
  },
  "trigger_config": {
    "type": "interval",
    "hours": 1
  }
}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "status": "success",
  "schedule_id": "job_67890"
}
```

#### Run Job Immediately
```http
POST /api/run_now
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "handler_id": "handler_12345",
  "method_name": "do_work",
  "job_params": {
    "message": "Hello World"
  }
}
```

#### List Schedules
```http
GET /api/schedules
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "schedules": [
    {
      "id": "job_67890",
      "next_fire_time": "2025-10-27T15:30:00Z",
      "trigger": "interval[1:00:00]",
      "args": ["handler_12345", "do_work", {...}]
    }
  ],
  "count": 1
}
```

### Configuration

#### Get Server Config
```http
GET /api/config
```

#### Health Check
```http
GET /api/health
```

---

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `SCHEDULEZERO_TORNADO_ADDR` | `127.0.0.1` | Tornado bind address |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_TORNADO_PORT` | `8888` | Tornado HTTP port |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_ZRPC_HOST` | `127.0.0.1` | zerorpc server host |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_ZRPC_PORT` | `4242` | zerorpc server port |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_DATABASE_URL` | `sqlite:///schedulezero_jobs.db` | Database connection |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_CONFIG_PATH` | `config.yaml` | Config file path |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_REGISTRY_PATH` | `handler_registry.yaml` | Registry file path |

### Trigger Types

#### Date Trigger (Run Once)
```json
{
  "type": "date",
  "run_date": "2025-10-27T15:30:00"
}
```

#### Interval Trigger (Repeating)
```json
{
  "type": "interval",
  "hours": 1,
  "minutes": 30
}
```

#### Cron Trigger (Schedule)
```json
{
  "type": "cron",
  "hour": "*/2",
  "minute": "0"
}
```

---

## 🧪 Testing

```bash
# Start server and handler in separate terminals, then:
poetry run python test_schedule.py

# Expected output:
# ✓ Handlers listed successfully
# ✓ Job executed immediately
# ✓ Job scheduled for future execution
```

---

## 🛣️ Roadmap

- [ ] Authentication & authorization
- [ ] Job execution history & logs
- [ ] Advanced UI with charts & graphs
- [ ] Docker containerization
- [ ] Handler health monitoring
- [ ] Job dependency management
- [ ] Multi-instance clustering
- [ ] Prometheus metrics export
- [ ] WebSocket support for real-time updates

---

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

Built with these excellent libraries:
- [Tornado](https://www.tornadoweb.org/) - Async web framework
- [APScheduler](https://apscheduler.readthedocs.io/) - Job scheduling
- [zerorpc](http://www.zerorpc.io/) - RPC framework
- [ZeroMQ](https://zeromq.org/) - Messaging library
- [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/) - Database toolkit

---

<div align="center">

**Made with ❤️ and Python**

[⬆ Back to Top](#-schedulezero)

</div>

Commit message:

Revise README with alpha warning and feature updates
Updated README.md to include warning about ScheduleZero's alpha status and its relationship with AppScheduler 4.0. Enhanced feature descriptions and added target integrations section.

README.md, after:

<div align="center">

# ⏰ ScheduleZero

### Lightweight Distributed Task Scheduling for Python

[![Python 3.12+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

[Features](#-features) •
[Quick Start](#-quick-start) •
[Architecture](#-architecture) •
[Documentation](#-documentation) •
[API](#-api-reference)

</div>

---

## 🎯 Overview
**ScheduleZero** is a resource-conscious, distributed task scheduling system built entirely in Python. Perfect for scenarios where heavyweight solutions like Celery are overkill—especially on memory-constrained systems like small VMs or edge devices.

## Warning 
**SchdeuleZero database and scheduling API is the AppScheduler 4.0 project. The profile of features in this project is quite different, broader in some ways and more focused in others. ** 
Be aware that ScheduleZero is in ALPHA and depends intimently with AppSchduler 4.0 and it's event model. This is Pre-Release software.
ScheduleZero project intends to contribute upstream to AppScheduler. 
Features are subject to change and clarification. Maping of testing coverage, verification and a dev cycle that pulls from upstream regularly had not been implimented.


**Why ScheduleZero? target features include:**
- 🪶 **Lightweight**: No message broker required (RabbitMQ/Redis). Simplest deployment model only uses Direct RPC communication via ZeroMQ.
- 🚀 **Fast**: Built on modern async Python (asyncio, Tornado)
- 🔄 **Distributed**: Separate process worker handlers with observablity in the interface may also add some orchestration features and feedback/back-pressure. 
- 💾 **Persistent**: SQLite-based job storage
- 🎨 **Beautiful UI**: Modern modular extentable microsite web interface for dashboard and UX based on HTMX, html component api, and controls developed as Vuetify "islands".
- 🛡️ **Reliable**: Built-in retry logic with exponential backoff
---

## ✨ Features

### Core Capabilities
- **🕐 Flexible Scheduling**: Date, interval, and cron triggers via APScheduler 4.x
- **📡 Remote Execution**: Distribute jobs across multiple handler processes
- **🔄 Auto-Discovery**: Handlers self-register with the central server
- **💪 Resilient**: Automatic retries with exponential backoff + jitter
- **📊 REST API**: Full HTTP API for programmatic control
- **🎛️ Web Dashboard**: Real-time monitoring and job management
- **💾 Persistent Storage**: Jobs survive restarts via SQLite
- **🔐 Thread-Safe**: Concurrent job execution with proper locking
 
### Advanced Features
- **Dynamic Handler Registration**: Add/remove workers on-the-fly
- **Method-Level Routing**: Route jobs to specific handler methods
- **Status Tracking**: Monitor handler availability and job execution
- **Configuration Management**: YAML-based instance configuration
- **Graceful Shutdown**: Clean termination of all components
- **Exponential Backoff**: Smart retry logic for failed jobs

### Target integrations
TBD (listed after they are working and tested)
---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Using Poetry (recommended)
poetry install

# Or using pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Configuration

Create `config.yaml` in your project root:

```yaml
instance_name: "My ScheduleZero Instance"
description: "Production task scheduler"
admin_contact: "admin@example.com"
version: "1.0.0"
```

### Running

// TODO: insert some common text harnesses with local govenor

**Terminal 1 - Start the Server:**
```bash
poetry run schedule-zero-server
# Server starts on http://127.0.0.1:8888
```

**Terminal 2 - Start a Handler:**
```bash
poetry run schedule-zero-handler
# Handler auto-registers and starts listening
```

**Terminal 3 - Test the System:**
```bash
poetry run python test_schedule.py
# Runs end-to-end tests
```

### Access the Dashboard

Open your browser to **http://localhost:8888**

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Component Overview

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│               ScheduleZero Central Server               │
│                                                           │
│  ┌──────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐  │
│  │   Tornado    │  │  APScheduler │  │   zerorpc    │  │
│  │  Web Server  │──│   4.x Async  │──│Registration  │  │
│  │   :8888      │  │   Scheduler  │  │Server :4242  │  │
│  └──────────────┘  └──────────────┘  └──────────────┘  │
│         │                  │                  │          │
│         │                  │                  │          │
│    ┌────▼─────┐      ┌────▼──────┐     ┌────▼──────┐  │
│    │   HTTP   │      │  SQLite   │     │ Handler   │  │
│    │   API    │      │  JobStore │     │ Registry  │  │
│    └──────────┘      └───────────┘     └───────────┘  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                          │
                          │  zerorpc (tcp)
                          │
        ┌─────────────────┴─────────────────┐
        │                                   │
        ▼                                   ▼
┌───────────────┐                   ┌───────────────┐
│   Handler 1   │                   │   Handler 2   │
│   :4243       │                   │   :4244       │
│               │                   │               │
│  • do_work()  │                   │  • process()  │
│  • backup()   │                   │  • analyze()  │
└───────────────┘                   └───────────────┘
```

### Technology Stack

| Component | Technology | Purpose |
|-----------|-----------|---------|
| **Web Framework** | Tornado 6.5+ | Async web server & HTTP API |
| **Scheduler** | APScheduler 4.x | Job scheduling & execution |
| **RPC Layer** | zerorpc | Lightweight, brokerless communication |
| **Persistence** | SQLite + SQLAlchemy | Job storage & retrieval |
| **Transport** | ZeroMQ | High-performance messaging |
| **Serialization** | MessagePack | Efficient data encoding |
| **Configuration** | PyYAML | Human-readable config files |

### Why These Choices?

#### 🌪️ **Tornado**
- Native `asyncio` support for APScheduler 4.x integration
- Efficient async I/O for handling many connections
- Built-in web server—no external dependencies

#### 📅 **APScheduler 4.x**
- Modern async-first design
- Flexible trigger types (date, interval, cron)
- Persistent job storage with datastore abstraction

#### 🔌 **zerorpc**
- No message broker required (unlike Celery)
- Minimal memory footprint
- Built-in heartbeat and timeout handling
- Automatic serialization with MessagePack

#### 💾 **SQLite**
- Zero configuration database
- Low memory usage (< 1MB typical)
- Perfect for embedded/edge deployments
- ACID transactions for reliability

---

## 📖 Documentation

### File Structure (After Refactoring)

```
src/schedule_zero/
├── app_configuration.py          # App config & environment vars
├── handler_registry.py            # Handler registration & clients
├── job_executor.py                # Job execution with retries
├── zerorpc_registration_server.py # RPC server for registration
├── tornado_app_server.py          # Main server orchestration
├── server.py                      # CLI entry point
├── api/
│   ├── tornado_base_handlers.py   # Base Tornado handlers
│   ├── handler_list_api.py        # Handler endpoints
│   ├── job_scheduling_api.py      # Job scheduling endpoints
│   └── config_api.py              # Configuration endpoint
└── handlers/
    ├── base.py                    # Abstract handler base class
    └── example.py                 # Example handler implementation
```

**Documentation Files:**
- [`REFACTORING_SUMMARY.md`](REFACTORING_SUMMARY.md) - Detailed refactoring notes
- [`TESTING_STATUS.md`](TESTING_STATUS.md) - Current testing status & known issues

---

## 🔌 API Reference

### Handler Management

#### List Handlers
```http
GET /api/handlers
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "handlers": [
    {
      "id": "handler_12345",
      "address": "tcp://127.0.0.1:4243",
      "methods": ["do_work", "backup", "process"],
      "status": "Connected"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Job Scheduling

#### Schedule a Job
```http
POST /api/schedule
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "handler_id": "handler_12345",
  "method_name": "do_work",
  "job_params": {
    "input_file": "/data/file.txt",
    "output_dir": "/results/"
  },
  "trigger_config": {
    "type": "interval",
    "hours": 1
  }
}
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "status": "success",
  "schedule_id": "job_67890"
}
```

#### Run Job Immediately
```http
POST /api/run_now
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "handler_id": "handler_12345",
  "method_name": "do_work",
  "job_params": {
    "message": "Hello World"
  }
}
```

#### List Schedules
```http
GET /api/schedules
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "schedules": [
    {
      "id": "job_67890",
      "next_fire_time": "2025-10-27T15:30:00Z",
      "trigger": "interval[1:00:00]",
      "args": ["handler_12345", "do_work", {...}]
    }
  ],
  "count": 1
}
```

### Configuration

#### Get Server Config
```http
GET /api/config
```

#### Health Check
```http
GET /api/health
```

---

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `SCHEDULEZERO_TORNADO_ADDR` | `127.0.0.1` | Tornado bind address |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_TORNADO_PORT` | `8888` | Tornado HTTP port |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_ZRPC_HOST` | `127.0.0.1` | zerorpc server host |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_ZRPC_PORT` | `4242` | zerorpc server port |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_DATABASE_URL` | `sqlite:///schedulezero_jobs.db` | Database connection |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_CONFIG_PATH` | `config.yaml` | Config file path |
| `SCHEDULEZERO_REGISTRY_PATH` | `handler_registry.yaml` | Registry file path |

### Trigger Types

#### Date Trigger (Run Once)
```json
{
  "type": "date",
  "run_date": "2025-10-27T15:30:00"
}
```

#### Interval Trigger (Repeating)
```json
{
  "type": "interval",
  "hours": 1,
  "minutes": 30
}
```

#### Cron Trigger (Schedule)
```json
{
  "type": "cron",
  "hour": "*/2",
  "minute": "0"
}
```

---

## 🧪 Testing

```bash
# Start server and handler in separate terminals, then:
poetry run python test_schedule.py

# Expected output:
# ✓ Handlers listed successfully
# ✓ Job executed immediately
# ✓ Job scheduled for future execution
```

---

## 🛣️ Roadmap

- [ ] Authentication & authorization
- [ ] Job execution history & logs
- [ ] Advanced UI with charts & graphs
- [ ] Docker containerization
- [ ] Handler health monitoring
- [ ] Job dependency management
- [ ] Multi-instance clustering
- [ ] Prometheus metrics export
- [ ] WebSocket support for real-time updates

---

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

Built with these excellent libraries:
- [Tornado](https://www.tornadoweb.org/) - Async web framework
- [APScheduler](https://apscheduler.readthedocs.io/) - Job scheduling
- [zerorpc](http://www.zerorpc.io/) - RPC framework
- [ZeroMQ](https://zeromq.org/) - Messaging library
- [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/) - Database toolkit

---

<div align="center">

**Made with ❤️ and Python**

[⬆ Back to Top](#-schedulezero)

</div>
